- [Buckalka] Alright, so at this point
we're going to start taking a look
at using JDBC from
within a UI application.
Now the JDBC calls themselves are the same
but when do we create
the data source class
and how do classes in the
application access it?
How do we perform database operations
so that the user interface doesn't freeze?
And how do we report the results
back to the user?
Well, the purpose of these videos
is to answer those questions.
So note here
that the goal isn't to create
a pretty user interface
the focus is on the questions
that I mentioned previously
using a functional user interface.
So I'm going to assume at this point
that you've watched the
Java Effects section
of the course and there from
I'm only going to
explain the user
interface specific concept
if it's new
and hasn't been previously covered
in that section.
So therefore I advise
if you haven't been through
the Java Effects section of the course
make sure you do check that out
at least go through
like a number of the initial videos
to get a bit of an idea
on what to expect
and also what Java Effects is.
And if you don't do that
I think may find
that you possibly might get
a little bit lost
so I think it is important to do that.
So what I've done
is I've created a new Java Effects project
called Music UI
and the user interface itself
we're going to be creating
is fairly simple.
So, we're going to be using a border pane
with a table view
in the sent position.
Now we're also gonna have a progress bar
which won't be visible
when the application starts
for reasons that will become apparent
and at the bottom of the window
will be where that resides
in a h-box.
Now in the right position
we'll place a v-box
containing several buttons.
Now pressing a button
is gonna essentially perform
a SQL operation
so we're going to have three buttons.
List artists, the second
button to show albums
for a selected artist
and thirdly a an update artist button.
Now that may not sound like much
but each one here's
going to demonstrate something different
that can be extended
to similar operations.
So the list artists button
will query all the data
in a table and present that
to the user.
Now the show artist button
will need to do a query
based on a selected record
and then display the results.
And finally, the update artist button
will demonstrate what's involved
when performing one of the crud operations
that changes existing data in the table.
So let's start out now
by renaming the sample .fxml file.
So we'll come over here
right click that as we've done before
refactor, rename
and we'll call that main.fxml.
And now let's go ahead
and add some fxml talk.
Now just to save a bit of time
I'm just going to copy
and paste the code here
and I crafted this fxml
using the same builder
so if you're looking at this coding
that I'm about to paste in
and comparing that save to code
that we have created manually
in the Java Effects section
of the course
so it might be a bit wordier
and that's because again
it would credit it the same buildup.
Alright, so I'm just
gonna paste that code in.
And this code is available
in the resources section
of this video as well.
So you haven't to type it all in.
So let's just go back now
to our main.java file
and what we're gonna do is
make a few changes to the start method
and set the main windows title and size.
So for the title,
we're gonna change that
from where it's currently
on 'Hello World'.
We'll change that to Music Database.
And for the setScene
let's change the size.
Instead of 300 by 275
we'll change it to 800
by let's put it at 600.
800 by 600.
Alright, so let's just run this
just to see what the user interface
is looking like.
There's our basic interface.
So you can see
we've got an area here for contents
we've got our buttons to the right
and of course we've got this progress bar.
Now, I did actually mention
that the progress bar's gonna be invisible
but I wanted to leave it by default
the first time to just
show you what it looks like
and where it's positioned
now that you've seen it
down here at the bottom
let's close down the app
and make that invisible
so we'll go back to the main.fxml
and we'll change this
progress bar over here
on line 40
and what we'll do is
we'll put a new property here,
visible="false"
spelled.
Alright, so now that we've done that
we'll go back to our main
and run it again
we should find that progress bar
is now disappeared.
'Kay, no progress bar
and we'll actually make that visible
when it's appropriate
in this application that we're building.
Okay.
And incidentally
in a real world application
we'll probably do it
in such a way
that there was an empty
space near the bottom
but okay, we're not focusing
on the user interface
in this particular set of videos.
Now, the other thing I
want to point out here
is we just got back to our main.fxml again
and look at our table up here
on line 16.
I want you to see
how we're setting the table column
prefWidth property over here
on line 18.
What we're doing here
is we're setting the width
to the same width as the table view
so that the name column
will occupy the entire table width.
Now we've used a notation there
$.
Now what that means
is that we want to set the prefWidth
to the width of the control
with the effects ID of artist table
which in this case
is our table view
on line 16.
You can actually do that
with any property.
Right, so now let's turn
to using jdbc.
What we're going to do first
is copy the model classes we created
in the previous set of videos
in this section of the course.
So I'm gonna go
and look at our music
project model's directory.
So what I'm gonna do
is actually open up the project
and I'll open
do open recent
and I'm gonna go to Music
which is our previous project.
And we're gonna open that in a new window.
Again, that's the project
that we we're working on previously
I'm just gonna open the
project pane over here
so we can see that it is.
What I'm gonna do then
is never get to the location
of the music properties model directory
copy it and then paste it
into our new project.
So what I'm gonna do
is just come over here
and right-click on the package for model
Reveal in Finder
I think it will be show
in Explorer Windows
or something to that words that effect.
Basically I'm going to actually just copy
that entire folder
copy that.
Then I'm just going to
just close down this
leaving out our original project.
Now I'm going to
just paste that into
whatever the project
into whatever the package line is
in our case it's sample here.
I'm just gonna click on sample
right-click and paste.
Click on OK.
Now you can see
that it's pasted
in the not only the model directory
but also on the source code
that we we're working on
in those previous videos.
So we'll go to Datasource,
Artist, Album, SongArtist,
as well as Song is called.
Now we don't actually need the Song
and SongArtist classes.
So for that reason
I'm just going to just click on those
and delete those.
So we've just got now
Album, Artist, and Datasource.
Now we want the controller
to be able to use
the Datasource class.
Now in a real world application
you'd probably have
more than one controller
and they'd all need access.
So, we could have
each one create
an instance of the class
but which one then
would be responsible
for managing the connexion
on calling the open and close methods?
Well, when working with a datasource
it's actually quite common
to use a Singleton pattern
for the datasource class.
Now it's called a Singleton pattern
and we have talked about this
in the course previously
because we use it
when we want an application
to create only one instance
of a particular class.
So, every object
that needs to call methods
in the Singleton
will use the same instance
of the datasource to do so.
So, to actually turn our datasource class
into a Singleton is actually
quite straightforward
so I'm gonna double click type in it.
And what we need to do
is create a private constructor first
so let's go ahead and do that
so I'm just gonna go down
past all these constants set ups
and what I've brought up here
so I'm just going to
do private Datasource.
Now, since it's private
only the class will be able
to create instances of itself.
In other words
no other class
will be able to construct
an instance of Datasource
and that's what we want here.
So, now that we've done that
we need to create the variable
that will hold that one instance
of the class
that every other class
in the application will use.
Now this variable
will need to be static.
So we're going to put that
above the private definition
in there so it's gonna be
private static Datasource
and we'll call it instance
which is what it is.
Alright, we now need to add the method
that every other class we used
to access the instance.
Now we can create the Singleton instance
when we declare the variable
or we can create it
in the static access method
and that's where we're actually
going to do it in this case
we're going to call that get instance
so let's create that.
Gonna put that after
the private constructor
so it will be public static
Datasource cause we're
returning the Datasource
making sure by the way
that we're using the
right datasource here.
Sample.model and getInstance
as a matter of the method
and the code's going to be
if (instance == null)
Gonna put instance = new Datasource():
and then below that we're
gonna return instance.
So, when an object
wants to use the Singleton instance
it calls getInstance
the public static method
we've just created
the method checks to see
if the Singleton instance
has been previously created.
That's the code on line 126.
If it has, it returns it,
but if it hasn't
then it creates the instance
and then returns it.
Now, this is called a lazy instantiation
because the instance isn't created
until the first time it's needed.
Now this is perfectly valid code
but keep in mind
it's not thread safe.
In other words
it's possible for a
thread to be interrupted
after a check for null here.
Another thread could then run
check for null
and create instance.
Then the first thread can run
and create the second instance.
So our application would then
have two instances
on the go
and of course that defeats the purpose
of using a Singleton in the first place.
So consequentially instead
what we should really do here
is we can correct the instance
when the instance variable is declared
and that will actually be thread safe.
So what I'm going to do
is come up here
to line 119
and change that to lead the declaration
private static Datasource instance
then we'll just put it = new Datasource.
Now this way's also lazy instantiation
because the instance won't be created
until the first time the class is loaded
which will be the first time
some other instance references the class
by calling the get instance method.
So now that we've actually done that
we can update the get instance method
which is gonna be a lot simpler
because we can remove this code here
this if instance equals null check
and just return the instance only.
So whatever class now
wants to call a method
in the Datasource class
it will do the following,
it's gonna be using basically
Datasource.getInstance().
And whatever the method name is.
That's going to be the
calling convention used
to access all of the methods
in this particular class.
So let's remove that.
We're just getting this error here
about the Try-with-resources
are not supported
at this language level.
So, that's an error
that we've seen before in the course.
We're gonna fix it up
by right-clicking on the project name.
Open Module Settings.
Project.
Making sure that we're using Lambdas
and type annotation et cetera.
That fixes that error.
And because I've deleted
those two other classes
we're actually getting some errors here
so I'm just going to remove those.
Song Artist.
I'm gonna remove that method all together.
We've also got another one down here.
Now these of course
are all the methods
that we've written previously
which we're not gonna be
using those particular methods
in this part of the course.
Alright, so let's clear that up now
so we haven't got anymore errors.
So, now that we've done that
we come back down here
and look at our methods
our open and close methods.
We still have a question
of where to call the
open and close methods.
Now it would make sense
to open a connexion to the database
when an application is started
because our main window
wants to show data from the database.
And it would also make sense
to close the connexion
when the user shuts down the application
by closing the main window.
So what we're gonna do here
is make use of the Java
Effects life cycle methods
to open and close the database connexion
and if you recall
the application class
contains life cycle methods
that are either abstract or concrete
but don't actually do anything.
So consequentially we're gonna
overwrite the omit method
to call the datasource.open method
it will override the stop method
to call the datasource.close method.
Now the omit method
runs before the start method
that creates the user interface
and the stop method runs
when the application is shutting down
either because the application
has explicitly done somthing to close it
or because the code called platform.exit
both the init and stop methods
are implemented in the application class
but by default they don't do anything.
So, let's go back to the main class
and we'll actually get IntelliJ
to create some methods for us
in the main class.
So, I'm just gonna click in here
right-click and select generate
and we're gonna click on
select override methods.
And the ones here that we want
are the init and stop method.
So, I'm just gonna click on init and stop.
And click on OK.
And you can see
that's created those stubs for us.
Alright, so now that that created
in the init method
we're gonna connect to the database
and I'm gonna start by doing that.
Now, know here
that there's really no need
to call the super method.
They don't really do anything
both the super.init
and the super.stop
but we'll leave the super calls there
just in case this changes
in a future Java Effects release.
So, to open the database
we're gonna do Datasource.
Whoops, that was the wrong datasource.
So, Datasource
using the sample.model package here.
.getInstance().open
Down on the stop method
we'll again leave the
super.stop method call there.
And we'll put
Datasource.getinstance().close
Alright, so let's run this
to make sure it works.
And we got an error down here.
And that's because
we didn't add the jdbc driver
to the class path
and I deliberately did that
because I wanted to show you how
the UI still appeared
even though we actually got that error.
Now, if we can't connect to the database
we don't want the user interface to appear
because anything the user
tries to do would fail.
What we want to do
is inform the user
that there's been a
fatal error of some kind
and then shut down the application.
Now, normally we would do this
just using a pop-up dialogue
but since this isn't a UI
set of videos at this point
what we're gonna do
is just really just write
a message to the console.
Now the init method boolean
I'll have to check the return value
from the open method
and take appropriate
action when necessary.
So let's go ahead
and implement that
and then we'll finish off the video.
We're gonna close this down.
Back to our init method
we need to just change
it a little bit here now.
And instead of just calling it
we're going to return
we're going to make use
of the return code.
So, I'm gonna put if not
datasource.getInstance().open()
And we'll sys out there
and we'll just put 'FATAL ERROR'
again normally you would
actually have a pop-up
a dialogue or something of that nature
to inform the user of the problem,
but we're not focusing on the UI here
so we just going kinda
keep it pretty simple.
Couldn't connect to database
database
Then we'll do Platform, capital P, .exit.
Alright, so let's just try running that.
So this time
we've now got
the same error message we had previously
about not being able to
connect to the database.
Programme here got this fatal error,
couldn't connect to database.
So, it's done what we want it to do
and this point now
the user interface doesn't appear
because we couldn't get
access to the database.
Alright, so let's finish
the video here now.
In the next video
we'll add the SQlite to JDBC driver
to our class path
and then continue on
with creating this application.
So, we'll see you as always
in the next video.